NEAR DAILY WARNINGS OF TERROR
THREATS, AS THE DEADLINE
APPROACHES TO RENEW KEY PORTIONS
OF THE PATRIOT ACT.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY:
HIGH TEMPERATURES HIT INDIA.
MORE THAN 1,000 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
IN A RELENTLESS HEAT WAVE.
WE GET AN ON-THE-GROUND UPDATE.
>> THE PEOPLE MOST AFFECTED ARE
THE POOR, THE ELDERLY.
THEY'RE OFTEN PEOPLE WHO DON'T
HAVE POWER, SO THE MOST
VULNERABLE PEOPLE IN SOCIETY
WERE AFFECTED BY THIS.
>> ill:If PLUS, FROM HIPPIE TO
CORPORATE C.E.O.
THE HEAD OF AETNA INSURANCE ON
THE PAYOFF FOR A NON-TRADITIONAL
APPROACH TO LEADERSHIP, REDUCING
THE BOTTOM LINE.
>> I CAME TO WORK ONE DAY, AND I
SAID, "YOU KNOW WHAT?
I THINK WE SHOULD DO MEDITATION
AND YOGA AT WORK."
AND EVERYONE WENT, "UHHH!"
YOU KNOW?
THE EYE ROLL, RIGHT?
AND IT'S BECAUSE THE C.E.O. DOES
YOGA AND MEDITATION, WE'VE ALL
GOT TO DO YOGA AND MEDITATION.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: FORMER SPEAKER OF
THE HOUSE DENNIS HASTERT WAS
INDICTED TODAY AND CHARGED WITH
EVADING CURRENCY RULES AND LYING
TO THE F.B.I.
A STATEMENT FROM THE U.S.
ATTORNEY'S OFFICE IN CHICAGO
ALLEGES HE WITHDREW NEARLY A
MILLION DOLLARS IN CASH IN SUCH
A WAY THAT THE BANK WOULDN'T
HAVE TO REPORT THE TRANSACTIONS.
EACH COUNT OF THE INDICTMENT
CARRIES A MAXIMUM PENALTY OF
FIVE YEARS IN PRISON.
THE ILLINOIS REPUBLICAN LEFT
OFFICE IN 2007.
A NEW ROUND OF RAIN TODAY
THREATENED TO HAMPER SEARCH
EFFORTS FOR FLOOD VICTIMS IN
CENTRAL TEXAS.
FOUR PEOPLE DIED AFTER THE
SWOLLEN BLANCO RIVER ENGULFED
THE SMALL TOURIST TOWN OF
WIMBERLEY OVER MEMORIAL DAY
WEEKEND.
AND LOCAL OFFICIALS FEAR MORE
RAIN COULD MOVE DEBRIS AROUND,
MAKING IT TOO DANGEROUS FOR
SEARCH CREWS TO FIND THE EIGHT
PEOPLE WHO ARE STILL MISSING.
EVEN SO, THE FAMILIES OF THE
MISSING PLEDGED TO KEEP LOOKING.
>> AT TIMES WHEN IT COULD BE
EASY TO FEEL CYNICAL ABOUT THE
WORLD AROUND US, THIS EXPERIENCE
HAS STRENGTHENED OUR FAITH IN
GOD AND IN HUMANITY.
AT THE SAME TIME WE ALSO FEEL A
TREMENDOUS SENSE OF
RESPONSIBILITY AND RESOLVE.
THIS EFFORT IS NOT OVER.
WE ARE 100% COMMITTED TO FINDING
LAURA, ANDREW, LEIGHTON, RANDY,
WILL, RALPH AND SUE.
>> Woodruff: FARTHER EAST,
FLOODS ARE STILL EXPANDING IN
COMMUNITIES AROUND HOUSTON.
SEARCH TEAMS ARE LOOKING FOR TWO
PEOPLE WHO DISAPPEARED THERE
DURING THIS WEEK'S TORRENTIAL
RAINS.
>> Ifill: HUMAN ERROR WAS
PROBABLY NOT THE REASON THE ARMY
MISTAKENLY SHIPPED LIVE ANTHRAX
TO LABS IN NINE STATES AND
OVERSEAS.
ARMY GENERAL RAY ODIERNO SAID IT
WAS MORE LIKELY A FAILURE IN THE
TECHNICAL PROCESS OF HOW THE
ANTHRAX SAMPLES ARE KILLED, OR
INACTIVATED.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION HAVE LAUNCHED AN
INVESTIGATION, AND 22 PEOPLE AT
OSAN AIR BASE IN SOUTH KOREA ARE
BEING TREATED AS A PRECAUTION.
>> Woodruff: THE NATION'S TOP
COMMUNICATIONS REGULATOR OFFERED
UP A PLAN TODAY TO BRING
SUBSIDIZED BROADBAND ACCESS TO
THE POOR.
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION,
TOM WHEELER, WANTS TO EXPAND A
PHONE SUBSIDY PROGRAM FOR LOW-
INCOME FAMILIES TO INCLUDE
INTERNET ACCESS.
NEARLY HALF OF THOSE HOUSEHOLDS
DON'T HAVE HIGH-SPEED INTERNET
CONNECTIONS AND MANY RELY ON
SMARTPHONES TO GET ONLINE.
>> Ifill: "SCIENCE" MAGAZINE
RETRACTED A STUDY TODAY THAT
CLAIMED OPENLY GAY CANVASSERS
COULD SWAY VOTERS OPINIONS IN
FAVOR OF GAY MARRIAGE.
"SCIENCE" REMOVED THE STUDY,
TITLED "WHEN CONTACT CHANGES
MINDS," WITHOUT THE AGREEMENT OF
THE PAPER'S CO-AUTHOR.
DESPITE REQUESTS FROM "SCIENCE"
INVESTIGATORS, HE NEVER PRODUCED
THE RAW DATA UNDERLYING THE
STUDY.
THE PAPER WAS ORIGINALLY
PUBLISHED FIVE MONTHS AGO.
>> Woodruff: CHRYSLER FIAT,
B.M.W. AND HONDA BECAME THE
FIRST AUTOMAKERS TO EXPAND THEIR
RECALLS OF AIRBAGS IN THE U.S.
TODAY.
LAST WEEK, THE MAKER OF THE
AIRBAGS, TAKATA, DOUBLED ITS
RECALL OF THE POTENTIALLY DEADLY
AIRBAGS TO NEARLY 34 MILLION IN
THE U.S.
SAFETY REGULATORS STILL HAVE TO
PINPOINT THE EXACT CAUSE OF THE
PROBLEM, BUT THE AIRBAGS CAN
EXPLODE WITH TOO MUCH FORCE AND
SHOOT SHRAPNEL INTO THE VEHICLE.
>> Ifill: THE FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION ANNOUNCED A RECORD
SETTLEMENT TODAY WITH TEVA
PHARMACEUTICALS FOR KEEPING
CHEAPER FORMS OF MEDICINES OFF
THE MARKET.
THE $1.2 BILLION SETTLEMENT IS A
MAJOR VICTORY AGAINST WHAT'S
KNOWN IN THE INDUSTRY AS "PAY
FOR DELAY" DEALS.
THE F.T.C. CHARGED THAT ONE OF
TEVA'S SUBSIDIARIES ILLEGALLY
BLOCKED THE LAUNCH OF GENERIC
VERSIONS OF ITS SLEEPING PILL
PROVIGIL.
>> Woodruff: ON WALL STREET
TODAY, THERE WERE MODEST LOSSES
AS TRADERS WAITED OUT A GREEK
DEBT DEADLINE.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 37 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
18,126.
THE NASDAQ FELL EIGHT POINTS,
THE S&P 500 DROPPED TWO POINTS.
>> Ifill: FORMER THREE-TERM
NEW YORK GOVERNOR GEORGE PATAKI
HAS BECOME THE LATEST REPUBLICAN
TO ENTER THE 2016 RACE FOR THE
WHITE HOUSE.
PATAKI WAS GOVERNOR OF THE
HEAVILY-DEMOCRATIC STATE DURING
THE 9/11 ATTACKS, BUT HASN'T
HELD POLITICAL OFFICE SINCE
2006.
TODAY, HE PLEDGED TO RESTORE
BIPARTISAN UNITY, AS HE
ANNOUNCED HIS CANDIDACY IN
EXETER, NEW HAMPSHIRE.
>> I HAVE SEEN WHAT AMERICANS
CAN DO WHEN WE UNDERSTAND WE
SHARE A COMMON DREAM.
A COMMON FUTURE.
A COMMON DESTINY.
I KNOW THAT WORKING TOGETHER
WITH THE SUPPORT OF A GOVERNMENT
DEDICATED TO RESTORING FREEDOM
RATHER THAN RESTRAINING IT, WE
WILL ONCE AGAIN ASTONISH THE
WORLD WITH WHAT WE CAN
ACCOMPLISH.
>> Ifill: PATAKI ENTERS AN
INCREASINGLY CROWDED FIELD, AS
THE EIGHTH REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
THE WHITE HOUSE CALLS ON
CONGRESS TO REW KENEY PARTS OF
THE PATRIOT ACT.
A RELENTLESS HEATWAVE TURNS
DEADLY FOR MORE THAN 1,400 IN
INDIA.
WHY PRESIDENT OBAMA'S EXECUTIVE
ORDERS TO REFORM IMMIGRATION
REMAIN STALLED.
A NEW STUDY FINDS TREATING
H.I.V. AT DIAGNOSIS IS CRITICAL
TO PREVENTING ILLNESS AND DEATH.
CRITICS CALL FOR FIFA'S
PRESIDENT TO STEP DOWN AMID A
MAJOR CRACKDOWN ON CORRUPTION.
THE QUIRKY C.E.O. OF AETNA
INSURANCE ON AUTHENTIC
LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT.
AND, A HARROWING ACCOUNT OF A
MASSACRE THAT UPENDED
SCANDANAVIA.
>> Woodruff: THIS COULD PROVE TO
BE A PIVOTAL WEEK FOR THE FUTURE
OF BOTH SURVEILLANCE AND PRIVACY
IN THE UNITED STATES.
THREE KEY PROVISIONS OF THE
PATRIOT ACT ARE SET TO EXPIRE,
AND SO FAR THERE IS NO
COMPROMISE IN THE U.S. SENATE
OVER WHETHER OR HOW TO EXTEND
THEM.
THAT HAS THE WHITE HOUSE RAISING
ALARM BELLS.
>> THE PROBLEM WE HAVE NOW IS
THAT THOSE AUTHORITIES RUN OUT
AT MIDNIGHT ON SUNDAY.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA ON
TUESDAY PRESSED THE SENATE TO
RENEW PATRIOT ACT SURVEILLANCE
PROGRAMS THAT ARE SET TO EXPIRE
LATE SUNDAY.
>> BECAUSE IT'S NECESSARY TO
KEEP THE AMERICAN PEOPLE SAFE
AND SECURE.
>> Woodruff: THREE INTELLIGENCE
TOOLS ARE SCHEDULED TO EXPIRE:
"ROVING WIRETAPS" THAT ALLOW
MONITORING OF TERROR SUSPECTS'
CALLS EVEN WHEN THEY SWITCH
PHONES.
THE SO-CALLED "LONE WOLF"
PROVISION THAT PERMITS
SURVEILLANCE OF INDIVIDUALS NOT
AFFILIATED WITH TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS.
AND FINALLY: THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY'S CONTROVERSIAL
BULK COLLECTION OF AMERICANS'
TELEPHONE METADATA RECORDS.
IT'S AUTHORIZED UNDER SECTION
215 OF THE PATRIOT ACT.
THE SENATE FAILED TO PASS A
TEMPORARY EXTENSION SATURDAY.
KENTUCKY REPUBLICAN RAND PAUL
WAS AMONG THOSE OBJECTING TO THE
METADATA COLLECTION.
>> THIS IS A DEBATE ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT A WARRANT WITH A
SINGLE NAME OF A SINGLE COMPANY
CAN BE USED TO COLLECT ALL THE
RECORDS, ALL OF THE PHONE
RECORDS OF ALL OF THE PEOPLE IN
OUR COUNTRY WITH A SINGLE
WARRANT.
>> Woodruff: SENATORS WILL TRY
TO WORK OUT A DEAL IN A RARE
SUNDAY SESSION, HOURS BEFORE THE
ACT EXPIRES.
WE GET THE WHITE HOUSE
PERSPECTIVE NOW FROM LISA
MONACO, ASSISTANT TO THE
PRESIDENT FOR HOMELAND SECURITY.
I SPOKE TO HER A SHORT TIME AGO.
LISA MONACO, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
WHY SHOULD THESE SURVEILLANCE
PROGRAMS BE CONTINUED?
>> GOOD TO BE WITH YOU, JUDY.
THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
JUDY, WHAT'S AT STAKE HERE IS
THE LAPSE OF THREE IMPORTANT
NATIONAL SECURITY AUTHORITIES
THAT WERE LAPSED ON SUNDAY,
EXPIRE SUNDAY NIGHT, IF THE
SENATE DOESN'T ACT, AND WHAT'S
AT ISSUE HERE IS, FRANKLY, A
NUMBER OF UNCONTROVERSIAL
AUTHORITIES THAT HAVE BEEN USED
TO IMPORTANT EFFECT BY OUR
NATIONAL SECURITY INVESTIGATORS
FOR YEARS.
THESE ARE AUTHORITIES THAT HAVE
BEEN REAUTHORIZED SEVERAL TIMES
OVER THE LAST SEVERAL YEARS AND
THESE ARE TOOLS AS BASIC
BUILDING BLOCKS FOR NATIONAL
SECURITY INVESTIGATIONS TO CATCH
TERRORISTS, TO IDENTIFY
TERRITORIES, TO IDENTIFY
TERRORISTS' PLOTS AND THEY ARE
USED TO GREAT EFFECT BY OUR
INVESTIGATORS AND OUR F.B.I.
AGENTS AND INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITY.
WHAT YOU'VE HEARD FROM THE
F.B.I. DIRECTOR AND OTHERS IS
THAT THE LOSS OF THESE TOOLS
WILL IMPACT THEIR WORK
TREMENDOUSLY.
>> Woodruff: SO HAS THE
PRESIDENT AGREED TO SCALE BACK
THE MASS COLLECTION OF AMERICAN
PHONE DATA IN ORDER THAT THERE
BE SOME RESTRICTIONS ON WHEN
THAT COLLECTION IS DONE?
>> WELL, WHAT'S INTERESTING
ABOUT THIS, JUDY, IS THAT SOME
VERY LEGITIMATE QUESTIONS HAVE
BEEN RAISED OVER THE LAST YEAR
OR SO ABOUT THE N.S.A.'S PROGRAM
TO COLLECT TELEPHONE METADATA,
INFORMATION ABILITY TELEPHONE
CALLS AND TELEPHONE CALL NUMBERS
BUT NOT THE CONTENT.
NEVERTHELESS, LEGITIMATE
QUESTIONS HAVE BEEN RAISED ABOUT
THE GOVERNMENT HOLDING ON TO
THATDA AT THAT. WHAT THE
PRESIDENT DID A YEAR AND A HALF
AGO IS ASK HIS NATIONAL SECURITY
TEAM COME UP WITH FORMS TO
ENSURE THAT THE OPERATIONAL
CAPABILITIES AND BENEFITS THAT
WE GET FROM THESE PROGRAMS
CONTINUE TO BE USED FOR THE
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE BUT THAT WE
ADDRESS THE VERY REAL CONCERNS
THAT PEOPLE HAVE ABOUT THEIR
PRIVACY WHEN GOVERNMENT HOLDS
THIS DATA.
SO WHAT THE U.S.A. FREEDOM ACT
DOES WHICH HAS GARNERED 348
DEMOCRAT AND REPUBLICAN VOTES IN
THE HOUSE AND IS BEFORE THE
SENATE, WHAT THAT BILL DOES IS
IMPLEMENT THE PRESIDENT'S
REQUESTED REFORMS WHERE THAT
DATA WOULD BE HELD BY THE
PROVIDERS, BY THE TELEPHONE
COMPANIES AND BE ABLE TO BE
ACCESSED BY THE GOVERNMENT ONLY
PURSUANT TO A COURT ORDER.
SO THE BILL THAT THE SENATE
SHOULD AND CAN ACT ON ON SUNDAY
IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THESE
REFORMS BEFORE THE SENATE AND
WOULD ALSO CONTINUE
UNCONTROVERSIAL AUTHORITIES THAT
THE F.B.I. AND OTHERS NEEDS TO
DO THEIR WORK.
>> Woodruff: JUST QUICKLY, ON
THE CONTINUING TO COLLECT PHONE
METADATA UNDER COURT ORDER,
THERE ARE OPPONENTS WHO SAY EVEN
THAT IS STILL TOO LENIENT, THAT
A COURT IS STILL GOING TO BE
INCLINED TO SAY YES UNDER ALMOST
EVERY CIRCUMSTANCE.
>> WELL, WHAT WE'VE SEEN, JUDY,
IS THAT THIS PROGRAM THAT HAS
BEEN USED BY THE N.S.A. AND OUR
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY IN THE
PAST HAS PROVED TO BE THAT,
YOU'VE HEARD THAT FROM THE
NATIONAL SECURITY PROFESSIONALS.
BUT, NEVERTHELESS, LEGITIMATE
QUESTIONS ARE RAISED, WE'VE
ADDRESSED THEM WITH GUARDED
BIPARTISAN SUPPORT AND NOW
THERE'S NO REASON NOT TO ACT ON
THAT BILL AND OTHERWISE TO NOT
DO SO WOULD BE TO COURT
UNNECESSARY RISK.
>> Woodruff: NOW THE OTHER TWO
PROVISIONS YOU'RE REFERRING TO,
ONE IS THE SO-CALLED ROVING
WIRETAPS PROVISION, ANOTHER IS
THE SO-CALLED LONE WOLF
PROVISION THAT WOULD ALLOW YOU
TO TRACK PEOPLE NOT OTHERWISE
IDENTIFIED AS TERRORISTS, AND I
UNDERSTAND YOU TO BE SAYING
THERE'S A LOT -- BUT FOR THE
AUDIENCE WHO DOESN'T UNDERSTAND
WHAT THESE PROVISIONS DO, WHAT
IS THE LOSS IF THESE PROVISIONS
EXPIRE?
>> LET ME EXPLAIN THAT.
WITH RESPECT TO THE ROVING
WIRETAP PROVISION, THIS IS AN
AUTHORITY THAT HAS BEEN USED TO
GREAT EFFECT ON THE CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS.
THINK ABOUT A BASIC CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATION WHEN A SUSPECT
USES MULTIPLE AND DIFFERENT CELL
PHONES.
IN THIS DAY AND AGE, THAT'S A
TOOL THAT INVESTIGATORS WANT TO
HAVE IN THEIR TOOLKIT.
WHAT THIS AUTHORITY DOES IS
ALLOWS THE F.B.I. TO GO TO A
COURT AND SAY, THE SUBJECT THAT
WE'RE INTERESTED IN USES
MULTIPLE PHONES, MAYBE
DELIBERATELY CHANGES UP HIS
PHONES, AND RATHER THAN HAVE TO
GO REPEATEDLY BACK TO A JUDGE TO
TRY AND STAY AHEAD OF THAT, THIS
AUTHORITY WOULD ALLOW THEM TO
STAY UP ON THAT PARTICULAR
INDIVIDUAL.
THIS IS A TOOL THAT'S BEEN USED
IN DRUG INVESTIGATIONS AND
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS FOR
DECADES AND IT'S ONE THAT IS
USED IN THE NATIONAL SECURITY
INVESTIGATIONS TO GREAT EFFECT
AND WE WANT TO CONTINUE TO HAVE
THAT TOOL FOR OUR INVESTIGATORS.
>> Woodruff: QUICKLY, WHAT'S
THE LOSS IF ANY OF THIS EXPIRES
EVEN FOR A MATTER OF A FEW DAYS?
>> THE LOSS, JUDY, IS TAKING
UNNECESSARY RISKS.
WE ARE IN A HIGH-THREAT
ENVIRONMENT.
WE FACE THREATS EVERY DAY FROM
THOSE WHO ARE TRYING TO DO US
HARM, WHETHER AL QUAIDA,
AL QUAIDA IN THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA AND I.S.I.L AS WE'VE
SEEN IN THE MOST RECENT PERIODS.
THE WAFF HERE IS HAVING AN
UNNECESSARY GAP IN OUR
COLLECTION AND NOT BEING ABLE TO
USE TOOLS THAT HAVE BEEN PROVEN
AND HAVE BEEN SAID BY OUR
INTELLIGENCE PROFESSIONALS AND
LAW ENFORCEMENT PROFESSIONALS
THAT THEY ARE USEFUL AND
NECESSARY TO KEEP THE COUNTRY
SAFE.
>> Woodruff: LISA MONACO WHO
IS ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT,
WE THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: WE GET DIFFERENT
VIEWS NOW ON JUST WHAT THESE
SPYING POWERS MEAN, AND WHAT
MIGHT HAPPEN IF THEY EXPIRE.
JAMES BAMFORD, IS AUTHOR OF
"THE SHADOW FACTORY" AND HAS
CHRONICLED THE NATIONAL SECURITY
COMPLEX FOR DECADES.
AND MICHAEL MUKASEY, IS THE
FORMER ATTORNEY GENERAL UNDER
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH.
GENTLEMEN, WE WELCOME BOTH OF
YOU TO THE PROGRAM.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
MR. MUKASEY, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
YOU HEARD LISA MONACO'S
ARGUMENTS FOR WHY THE
ADMINISTRATION WANTS THESE
PROVISIONS TO CONTINUE WITH SOME
MODIFICATION, AS YOU'VE HEARD.
WHAT'S YOUR REACTION?
>> MY REACTION IS THAT I'M WITH
HER ON THE CONTINUATION.
WHERE I HAVE A PROBLEM IS THE
MODIFICATIONS THEY'VE AGREED TO.
>> Woodruff: AND SPELL THAT
OUT.
>> SURE.
WHAT THEY'VE DONE IS TO SAY THAT
THE GOVERNMENT CAN'T CONTINUE TO
KEEP THESE -- SEND THE LIST OF
NUMBERS WITH NO IDENTIFYING
INFORMATION AS TO THE CORE OR
THE CONTENT -- THE CALL OR THE
CONTENT BUT RATHER HAVE THE
CARRIERS KEEP THAT INFORMATION.
THE METADATA IS SIMPLY A RECORD
OF A NUMBER THAT'S CALLED -- A
NUMBER THAT CALLS IT AND THE
LENGTH OF THE CALL AND THE DAY
OF THE CALL.
THAT'S ALL THE METADATA CON ZIPS
OF.
THERE'S NO CONTENT AND NO
IDENTIFICATION OF PEOPLE.
WHAT THAT CAN BE USED FOR IS IF
A SUSPECT NUMBER IS IDENTIFIED
AND A COURT CONCURS, THEN THEY
CAN RUN THAT NUMBER AGAINST THIS
DATABASE OF NUMBERS TO FIGURE
OUT WHETHER A TERRORIST HAD
EITHER BEEN CALLED BY OR HAS
CALLED A NUMBER IN THE UNITED
STATES.
THAT'S THE ONLY PURPOSE IT'S PUT
TO, THAT'S THE ONLY WAY THAT
IT'S USED.
THAT INFORMATION IN THE HANDS OF
THE GOVERNMENT IS READILY
ACCESSIBLE.
IF YOU RELY SIMPLY ON THE
CARRIERS TO HOLD IT, THEN THERE
IS NO COMPULSION IN THIS
LEGISLATION FOR THEM TO KEEP IT
AT ALL AND, IN FACT, IT'S VERY
EASY TO IMAGINE THEM COMPETING
IN ELIMINATING OR SCRUBBING THIS
INFORMATION IN SHORT ORDER OR IN
OFFERING PLANS THAT DON'T
REQUIRE THEM FOR BUSINESS
REASONS TO KEEP THE METADATA.
>> Woodruff: BUT AS WE HEARD,
JAMES BAMFORD, LISA MONACO
ACKNOWLEDGED THERE IS CRITICISM
OF THIS OUT THERE, THE PRESIDENT
DECIDED TO MAKE THIS
MODIFICATION, TO SAY YOU HAVE TO
GO TO A COURT IF YOU WANT TO GET
ACCESS TO THIS PHONE METADATA.
YOUR CONCERN IS THAT EVEN THAT
IS NOT ENOUGH OF A WAY OF
PROTECTING PEOPLE'S PRIVACY.
>> I THINK THERE IS REALLY TWO
ISSUES HERE, ONE IS WHETHER IT'S
USEFUL OR NOT.
YOU'VE HAD THE COURTS, FIRST OF
ALL, DECLARE ILLEGAL JUDGE LEON
AND THE U.S. DISTRICT COURT IN
WASHINGTON CALL IT IRRELEVANT.
THE APPEALS COURTS SAID IT'S
ILLEGAL.
SECOND OF ALL, IS IT USEFUL?
YOU'VE HAD THE PRESIDENT'S
REVIEW BOARD COME OUT AND SAY
THERE'S NOTHING USEFUL THAT WILL
COME OUT OF IT.
THE BIPARTISAN PRIVACY GROUP
CAME OUT A FEW MONTHS AGO AND
SAID THEY NEVER FOUND ANYTHING
USEFUL THAT'S COME OUT OF IT.
IF YOU LOOK BACK, THE N.S.A. HAD
ANOTHER PROGRAM, IT WAS THE
IDENTICAL PROGRAM EXCEPT IT WAS
FOR EMAIL.
EVERYBODY WHO SENT AN EMAIL
WOULD BE -- WHO YOU SENT IT TO
AND WHERE IT CAME FROM AND SO
FORTH WOULD BE A -- A RECORD
WOULD BE KEPT ON IT.
THEY GOT RID OF THAT BECAUSE
THEY WERE USELESS AND I THINK
THEY SHOULD DO THE SAME THING
WITH THIS PROGRAM.
>> Woodruff: MICHAEL MUKASEY,
GIVEN WHAT JAMES BAMFORD SPELLED
OUT, GIVEN SUGGESTS AS TO
WHETHER THERE IS ANY VALUE TO
THIS PROGRAM, WHY CONTINUE IT?
>> WELL, IT IS NOT AT ALL
USELESS.
IN POINT OF FACT, IT IS USED TO
ASSEMBLE INTELLIGENCE.
IT IS NOT A CRIME SOLVING TOOL
PRINCIPALLY, ALTHOUGH IT HAS
SOLVED CRIMES INCLUDING EXPOSING
THE PLOT TO BLOW UP THE NEW YORK
CITY SUBWAYS.
BUT IF YOU ASKED HOW MANY PLOTS
IT'S STOPPED, YOU'RE ASKING THE
WRONG QUESTION.
YOU SHOULD BE ASKING WHAT'S THE
VALUE OF BITS OF INTELLIGENCE
GATHERED AND USED WITH OTHER
BITS OF INTELLIGENCE THAT ARE
AVAILABLE TO BUILD A PICTURE OF
WHAT IT IS THAT WE'RE LOOKING
FOR AND OF VARIOUS CIRCLES OF
PLOTTERS AND NETWORKS OF
PLOTTERS.
AS FAR AS COURTS HAVING FOUND IT
UNLAWFUL, THE FACT IS THAT THE
COURT HAS CONSIDERED THIS MORE
THAN 40 TIMES AND FOUND IT
LAWFUL EACH TIME.
THE FACT IS THAT THERE ARE
DISTRICT JUDGES FOUND IT AWFUL,
ONE COURT OF APPEAL THAT ACTED
AND TWO OTHERS THAT IS HAVE THE
ISSUE BEFORE THEM THAT HAVEN'T
SPOKEN.
>> Woodruff: LET ME PUT IT TO
YOU, JAMES BAMFORD, GIVEN WHAT
THE COURTS HAVE SAID AND THE
QUESTION HE RAISED ABOUT THE
ABILITY THIS GIVES THE
GOVERNMENT, WHETHER METADATA OR
THE METADATA WITH THE COURT'S
PERMISSION, IT'S SOMETHING THAT
IS NEEDED TO FIGHT TERRORISM.
>> EVERYBODY THAT'S LOOKED AT
THIS SAID IT'S VIRTUALLY
USELESS.
THE N.S.A. ORIGINALLY CAME UP
AND SAID THERE ARE ORIGINALLY 44
DIFFERENT AREAS WE WERE ABLE TO
STOP TERRORISTS.
IT CAME DOWN TO ONE INCIDENT
THAT ENDED UP BEING USEFUL AND
THAT WAS FINDING A TAXI DRIVER
IN SAN DIEGO THAT SEND $8,000 TO
A GROUP IN SO MALL. I CAN'T
THAT'S THE ONLY THING THEY HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO SHOW SINCE 2001
THAT THIS PROGRAM HAS PRODUCED
IN TERMS OF INTELLIGENCE.
SO, NO, I IT ISN'T.
THE SECOND ISSUE IS THE PROBLEM
OF TRUST FROM THE AMERICAN
PUBLIC.
WE'VE HAD THE RELENTLESS
EAVESDROPPING PROGRAM THAT WAS
ILLEGAL, A VIOLATION OF FOREIGN
INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE ACT.
THE ONLY WAY WE FOUND OUT ABOUT
IT WAS THROUGH WHISTLE BLOWERS.
THE SAME THING WITH THIS PROGRAM
HERE.
IT'S ONLY THROUGH EDWARD SNOWDEN
WE ENDED UP KNOWING ABOUT THIS
AND I THINK THERE IS A LOT OF
LEGITIMACY TO PEOPLE BEING
SKEPTICAL THE GOVERNMENT
CLAIMING THIS IS SO VALUABLE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT THE
THE QUESTION OF TRUST, MICHAEL
MUKASEY?
>> THERE ARE 33 PEOPLE WHO HAVE
ACCESS TO THIS ONLY UNDER THE
OBSERVATION OF WHAT YOU MIGHT
CALL A TRIFECTA, A COURT.
THEY'RE UNDER THE EXECUTIVE
SUPERVISION THEY HAVE AND THE
OVERSIGHT OF AT LEAST TWO
COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS.
THAT'S ALL THREE BRANCHES OF
GOVERNMENT.
THE INFORMATION ITSELF, AGAIN,
CONSISTS ONLY OF NUMBERS.
TODSENT CONSIST OF ANY OTHER
IDENTIFYING INFORMATION AND
THERE'S NOTHING THAT CAN BE DONE
UNLESS AND UNTIL A NUMBER -- A
SUSPECT NUMBER TRIGGERS THE USE
OF IT.
>> Woodruff: LET ME GIVE YOU
THE FINAL WORD, JAMES BAMFORD,
ON THIS.
WE SHOULD POINT OUT THE
PRESIDENT BACKED OFF ON THE
RIDGE PATROL VISION WHICH IS
COLLECTING ALL METADATA ON ALL
PHONE RECORDS.
>> YES, THE U.S.A. FREEDOM ACT I
THINK IS A VAST IMPROVEMENT.
THE QUESTION IS WHETHER IT'S A
VAST IMPROVEMENT ENOUGH AND
THAT'S AN ISSUE DEBATED NOW.
THE QUESTION IS WHETHER IT'S
THAT OR NOTHING AND I THINK
THAT'S WHAT'S GOING TO BE
DECIDED SUNDAY.
>> Woodruff: JAMES BAMFORD AND
MICHAEL ME MUKASEY, WE THANK YOU
BOTH.
>> Ifill: TEMPERATURES IN INDIA
SOARED TO OVER 115 DEGREES TODAY
IN SOME PLACES, PUSHING THE
COUNTRY'S HEAT WAVE DEATH TOLL
ABOVE 1,400 PEOPLE.
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT
WILLIAM BRANGHAM HAS MORE.
>> Brangham: EVEN FOR A NATION
ACCUSTOMED TO HEAT WAVES, THIS
ONE HAS BEEN ESPECIALLY TOUGH.
FOR ALMOST A WEEK, NOW, NEAR
RECORD TEMPERATURES HAVE MADE
DAILY LIFE MISERABLE.
SOME ROADS IN NEW DELHI
LITERALLY MELTED IN THE
TWO PROVINALSES IN THE SOUTHERN
PART OF THE COUNTRY HAVE BORNE
THE BRUNT.
THEIR HOSPITALWERES FULL OF
VICTIMS OF THE HEAT.
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS HAVE ASKED
PEOPLE NOT TO VENTURE OUTSIDE IF
THEY CAN AVOID IT AND DRINK
FLUIDS CONSTANTLY.
IT'S BEEN PARTICULARLY HARD IN
THE POORER REGIONS OF THE
COUNTRY WHERE SPOTTY OR
NONEXISTENCE LEK TRIES PHI PUTS
THE IDEA OF FANS OUT OF REACH.
THIS TIGER AT A NEW DELHI ZOO
WAS ONE OF THE FA FIND SOME
RELIEF.
I TALKED TO "TIME MAGAZINE"'S
NIKHIL KUMAR AND ASKED HIM ABOUT
THE RISING DEATH TOLL AND WHO
SPECIFICALLY WAS AFFECTED BY THE
COMPING TEMPERATURES.
>> THE VICTIMS OF THE HEAT HAVE
BEEN THE ELDERLY AND PEOPLE WHO
WERE FORCED TO GO OUT AND WORK
IN THE HEAT.
SO CONSTRUCTION WORKERS, OTHERS
OF ELDERLY AGE AND HOMELESS
PEOPLE, ACCORDING TO OFFICIALS,
THEY MAKE UP THE BULK OF THOSE
WHO DIED.
>> INDIA HAS HEAT WAVES ALMOST
EVERY YEAR.
HOW DOES THIS COMFIRE WHAT'S
HAPPENED IN THE PAST?
>> SO THIS ONE IS MORE SEVERE
THAN LAST YEAR.
THE DEATH TOLL IN ANDHRA PRADESH
IS SOMEWHERE AROUND DOUBLE SO
FAR BUT THERE HAVE BEEN MORE
SEVERE HEAT WAVES IN THE PAST.
THE SAME STATE IN 2003, TO ABOUT
3,000 PEOPLE DIED BECAUSE TO
HAVE THE HEAT WAVE, AROUND THE
SAME TIME AS THE HEAT WAVE THAT
FOLLOWED THAT SUMMER IN EUROPE.
SO YOU'RE PROBABLY RIGHT, HEAT
WAVES ARE A REGULAR OCCURRENCE.
ONE THING THAT HAS HAPPENED IS
THAT OVER THE LAST FEW DECADES
ACCORDING TO CLIMATE EXPERTS THE
FREQUENCY AND SEVERITY HAVE
INCREASED.
>> Reporter: HERE IN THE
UNITED STATES WHEN WE HAVE HEAT
WAVES, THE GOVERNMENTS ISSUE
ALERTS AND OPEN UP COOLING
CENTERS SO PEOPLE GET A BREAK
FROM THE HEAT.
WHAT HAS THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT
BEEN DOING TO TRY TO ALLEVIATE
THE SUFFERING?
>> THE RESPONSE HAS BEEN VERY
MUCH STATE BY STATE.
THERE ARE CERTAIN PARTS TO HAVE
THE COUNTRIES, A CITY IN THE
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH HIT BY A
HEAT WAVE IN 2010, FOLLOWING
THAT THEY PUT A HEAT WAVE A
ACTION PLAN INTO EFFECT TO WARN
PEOPLE AND TEACH THEM HOW TO
DEAL WITH IT.
THAT'S NOT THE CASE EVERYWHERE.
THAT'S MORE AN EXCEPTION THAN
THE RULE.
BUT THE RESPONSE IS IT'S VERY
MUCH DEPENDS ON WHERE YOU ARE.
IT'S NOT VERY WELL CORD MADE
FROM THE -- COORDINATED F THE
CENTER.
IT'S AT THE STATE LEVEL.
>> Reporter: HO HOW HAS THE
PUBLIC RESPONDED?
>> THE PEOPLE MOST AFFECTED, THE
POOR, OFTEN ELDERLY, THE ARERE
OFTEN PEOPLE WHO DON'T HAVE THAT
MUCH POWER SO THE MOST
VULNERABLE PEOPLE IN SOCIETY ARE
AFFECTED BY THIS WITH SOME
REGULATOR.
SO THERE HAVE BEEN VARIOUS
DISCUSSIONS BEGUN, YOU THINK SEE
IT ONLINE AMONG SOME PEOPLE
ABOUT SHOULD THIS BE CLASSED AS
A NATURAL DASTEISR AND THE
RESPONSE COORDINATED AS WITH
OTHER LARGE CALAMITY.
>> Brangham: IS THERE ANY IDEA
WHEN A RELIEF MIGHT COME?
>> THE MONSOON IS EXPECTED TO
HIT THE INDIAN MAINLINE AROUND
THE END OF THIS MONTH.
BUT THIS IS A LONG COUNTRY AND
IT WILL TAKE A FEW DAYS FOR IT
TO SPREAD AROUND DIFFERENT PARTS
OF THE COUNTRY, TO SAY THE
LEAST.
IN NEW DELHI, FOR EXAMPLE, WHEN
THE TEMPERATURE ON THE 26 OF MAY
HIT ABOUT 114 FAHRENHEIT, WE'RE
NOT EXPECTING SUSTAINED RELIEF
UNTIL EARLY JUNE, THE 3rd OF
JUNE, ACCORDING TO WEATHER
FORECASTERS.
SO IT'S GOING TO TAKE SOME TIME.
IT WILL STILL BE A FEW DAYS
BEFORE WE GET SOME SUSTAINED
RELIEF AROUND THE COUNTRY, AND
LONGER THAN A FEW DAYS FOR THE
REST OF THE COUNTRY.
>> Brangham: NIKHIL KUMAR,
"TIME MAGAZINE" IN NEW DELHI,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
SIGNATURE IMMIGRATION PROPOSAL
SUFFERED A MAJOR BLOW THIS WEEK,
WHEN A FEDERAL COURT REFUSED TO
ALLOW HIS PLAN TO TAKE IMMEDIATE
EFFECT.
IT WOULD GRANT WORK PERMITS AND
DEPORTATION PROTECTION TO
MILLIONS OF UNDOCUMENTED
RESIDENTS.
26 STATES SUED TO STOP THAT
EXECUTIVE ACTION.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT DECIDED
NOT TO APPEAL DIRECTLY TO THE
SUPREME COURT, BUT WILL TRY TO
MAKE ITS CASE TO AN APPEALS
COURT IN JULY.
BUT FOR NOW, EVERYTHING IS IN
LIMBO.
HERE TO DISCUSS THAT STATE OF
AFFAIRS IS ALAN GOMEZ, WHO
COVERS IMMIGRATION REPORTER FOR
"USA TODAY," AND STEPHEN
LEGOMSKY, PROFESSOR OF LAW AT
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY IN SAINT
LOUIS.
PROFESSOR LEGOMSKY, HOW BIG A
SETBACK IS THIS COURT DECISION
FOR THE ADMINISTRATION?
>> IT'S A TEMPORARY SETBACK.
THE GOCHT APPEALED THE JUDGE'S
INJUNCTION BUT RECOGNIZING THAT
APPEALS CAN TAKE A LONG TIME TO
DECIDE, THE GOVERNMENT ASKED THE
COURT OF APPEALS IF IT WOULD AT
LEAST TEMPORARILY STAIRNLG JUDGE
HANNAH'S DECISION UNTIL THE
COURT HAD A CHANCE TO DECIDE THE
APPEAL.
SO THE OPINION ON TUESDAY IS A
DECISION BY A 2-1 VOTE NOT TO
GRANT THE TEMPORARY STAY.
HOWEVER, THE APPEALS COURT HAS
ANNOUNCED JUST TODAY THAT IT
PLANS TO HEAR ORAL ARGUMENTS ON
THE MAIN APPEAL ON JULY 10 AND
THE GOVERNMENT, OF COURSE, IS
HOPING THE COURT WILL HAND DOWN
A DECISION AS SOON AFTER WHAT AS
POSSIBLE AND IF IT DOES WE COULD
HAVE A DECISION IN THE NEXT FEW
MONTHS AND THE THE SETBACK WILL
PROVE TO BE NOT TOO TERRIBLE.
>> Ifill: ALAN GOMEZ, YOU
SPENT A FAIR AMOUNT OF TIME
TALKING TO PEOPLE WHO GET THEIR
HOPES UP AND DOWN ABOUT THE
PRESIDENT'S PLAN FOR IMMIGRATION
REFORM.
HOW IS THIS AFFECTING THEM?
>> IT'S ANOTHER LIKELY BIG HIT
FOR THEM.
IT WAS BACK IN FEBRUARY WHEN
JUDGE HANEEN IN BROWNSVILLE,
TEXAS, PUT THE FIRST STOP ON
THI PRSOGRAM.
HE DID IT A DAY BEFORE IT WAS
SUPPOSED TO GO INTO EFFECT.
IMAGINE YOU HAD THOUSANDS
OVERUNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY WHO HAS BEEN
COLLECTING PAPERS, FIGURING OUT
WHAT THEY NEEDED TO APPLY FOR
THE PROGRAM AND JUST THE DAY
BEFORE IS WHEN THE PROGRAM GOT
BLOCKED.
SO THIS IS ANOTHER BIG BLOW TO
THEM.
AS THE PROFESSOR MENTIONED,
THERE WILL BE HEARINGS IN JULY
BURKS WHATEVER COMES FROM THAT,
THE OTHER SIDE IS EXPECTED TO
APPEAL TO THE SUPREME COURT.
SO IT COULD BE FROM THE END OF
THE YEAR OR BEGINNING OF NEXT
YEAR BEFORE WE GET A FINAL
RESOLUTION OF WHAT GOES ON.
>> Ifill: THE 26 DAYS TO FILE
SUIT, WHAT ARE THE ARGUMENTS.
>> ONE IS A TECHNICAL PROCEDURAL
ARGUMENT.
THERE IS THE ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEDURAL ACT THAT SAYS CERTAIN
GOVERNMENT RULES HAVE TO GO
THROUGH A FAIRLY ELABORATE
PROCESS, WE NOTIFY THE PUBLIC,
GET INPUT AND MAKE A FINAL
DECISION.
THE ISSUE IS WHETHER THIS CASE
FALLS INTO AN EXEMPTION FOR
CERTAIN DISCRETIONARY RULES AND
WE ALSO ARGUE THE PRESIDENT
DOESN'T HAVE THE CONSTITUTIONAL
AUTHORITY TO STOP THE
ENFORCEMENT PRIORITIES THAT HE
HAS.
TWO COURTS HAVE ALREADY REJECTED
THOSE ARGUMENTS BUT JUDGE HANNAH
ACCEPTED THEM.
>> Ifill: BUT WHAT IS THE
STRATEGY WHINED NOT TAKING IT TO
COURT IMMEDIATELY AND A WHAT
STRIDES ARE THE ADMINISTRATION
WILLING TO TAKE IN THE JULY
APPEAL.
>> WE HAVE TWO TRACKS GOING ON.
THE FIRST IS THE OVERALL MERITS
OF THE CASE WHETHER THE
PRESIDENT HAD THE POWER TO DO
IT.
THE SECOND ONE WAS TO HOLD IT IN
PLACE AND STOP THE PROGRAM WHEN
THE FIRST ONE RAN THE COURSE.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT DECIDED
TO FOCUS ON IS THIS LEGAL, THE
BROADER QUESTION.
IN THEIR MINDS, THEY THINK THEY
WANT THE COMPLETE AND TOTAL
RESOLUTION.
THEY DON'T WANT TO TEMPORARILY
START THE PROGRAM AND STOP IT
AGAIN IF ANOTHER COURT RULES THE
ENTIRE PROGRAM IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
THEY'RE TRYING TO GET A FINAL
RESOLUTION SO IF AND WHEN THE
PROGRAM GOES INTO EFFECT THE
MILLIONS OF UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS WHO ARE APPLYING WILL
BE CONFIDENT THEY APPLY AND THE
PROGRAM WILL CONTINUE AND NOT BE
STOPPED BY A COURT DOWN THE
ROAD.
>> Ifill: WHEN THE WHITE HOUSE
PUT OUT THE STATEMENT YESTERDAY
IN REACTION TO THE COURT'S
RULING THEY SAID THE COURT
MISINTERPRETED THE FACTS AND
LAW.
WHICH FACTS AND LAW ARE WE
TALKING ABOUT IN FROM THE WHITE
HOUSE POINT OF VIEW?
>> THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
ACT, THAT WAS THE BASIS FOR
JUDGE HANNAH'S DECISION,
EVERYTHING TURNS ON WHETHER TRUE
DISCRETION IS BEING EXERCISED.
THE JUDGE DECIDED BECAUSE THERE
IS A FAIRLY HIGH APPROVAL RATE
FOR THE CASES, ABILITY 95%, IT
MUST BE TRUE NO DISCRETION IS
EXERCISED.
THE GOVERNMENT POINTS OUT IF YOU
ARE UNDOCUMENTED AND THERE IS
SOMETHING NEGATIVE IN YOUR
BACKGROUND THE LAST THING WE'LL
DO IS INITIATE CONTACT WITH THE
GOVERNMENT AND SAY HERE IS MY
NAME, ADDRESS AND HISTORY AND
FINGERPRINTS SO YOU CAN DO A
BACKGROUND CHECK ON ME AND
YOU'RE MORE UNLIKELY TO PAY
$460 FOR SOMETHING THAT WON'T BE
RECEIVED.
THIS IS A VERY SELF-SELECTED
POPULATION.
>> Ifill: YOU'RE IN FLORIDA
WHERE THERE ARE TWO CANDIDATES
FOR PRESIDENT WHO HEA HALE FROM
THERE.
THERWHERE DOES THAT STAND TONIG?
>> THE LONGER THE CASE GOES
THROUGH THE COURTS, THE MORE IT
BECOMES A 2016 PRESIDENTIAL
ISSUE.
JEB BUSH, MARCO RUBIO ARE BOTH
FROM HERE AND THEY LIKE EVERY
OTHER REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE ARE
VERY MUCH OPPOSED TO WHAT THE
PRESIDENT DID IN TRYING TO
PROTECT THE UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS THROUGH HIS EXECUTIVE
ACTION.
HOARVETION HILLARY CLINTON CAME
UP -- HOWEVER, HILLARY CLINTON
CAME UP STRONGLY SUPPORTING AND
SAYING SHE WANTED TO PROTECT
EVEN MORE UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS.
SO IF YOU GET A RULING SOMETIME
THIS YEAR, BASICALLY THE
REPUBLICANS WILL HAVE LAID DOWN
THEIR THOUGHTS ON THIS AND IT
WILL COME AT A TIME WHEN A LOT
OF HISPANIC VOTERS WILL BE
TRYING TO MAKE UP THEIR MIND ON
WHO THE CANDIDATE IS AND
REPUBLICANS PUSHING HARD TO
BLOCK THE PRESIDENT'S PLAN TO
PROTECT UNDOCUMENTED RESIDENTS
AND IT WON'T HELP THEM WITH THE
HISPANIC VOTING POPULATION.
>> Ifill: ALAN GOMEZ AND
STEPHEN LEGOMSKY, THANK YOU BOTH
VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE THAN TWO
DECADES, DOCTORS HAVE BEEN
TRYING TO PINPOINT WHEN IS THE
RIGHT MOMENT TO START PEOPLE
DIAGNOSED WITH H.I.V. ON
ANTIRETROVIRAL DRUGS.
THE DRUGS HAVE BEEN
EXTRAORDINARILY IMPORTANT IN
EXTENDING LIFE AND KEEPING
H.I.V. AT BAY.
BUT THEY CAN BE EXPENSIVE AND
DIFFICULT TO TOLERATE.
NOW, FEDERAL HEALTH OFFICIALS
SAY INDIVIDUALS SHOULD BE PUT ON
THOSE DRUGS AS SOON AS THEY ARE
DIAGNOSED OR LEARN THEY ARE
INFECTED.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT WAS MADE AFTER
A LARGE CLINICAL TRIAL WAS
STOPPED BECAUSE THE EVIDENCE FOR
THE DRUGS WAS SO OVERWHELMING.
EVEN SO, THAT PRESENTS A BIGGER
PROBLEM.
FEWER THAN 40% OF ADULTS AROUND
THE WORLD GET THE DRUGS THEY
NEED.
WE LOOK AT THIS WITH DR. ANTHONY
FAUCI OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE
OF HEALTH, WHOSE INSTITUTE
SPONSORED THE TRIAL AND MADE THE
ANNOUNCEMENT.
DR. FAUCI, WELCOME BACK TO THE
"NewsHour".
>> GREAT TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Woodruff: IT'S BEEN KNOWN
FOR SOME TIME IT'S IMPORTANT TO
GET THESE DRUGS TO PEOPLE
DIAGNOSED WITH H.I.V.
WHY IS THIS NEW FINDING THAT
IT'S ESSENTIAL TO DO IT EARLY
DIFFERENT?
>> WELL, BECAUSE IT'S A
DEFINITIVE CLINICAL TRIAL BY
COURT EXPERT OPINION OR COMMON
PRACTICE, WE ALL KNEW IT WAS
GOOD TO START EARLY TO BENEFIT
THE PERSON, BUT POLICIES OF WHEN
YOU'RE GOING TO RECOMMEND
STARTING THERAPY AND POLICIES
EVERYWHERE FROM W.H.O. TO THE --
>> Woodruff: TO THE WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION.
>> -- THE DEFINITIVE DECISION TO
START PEOPLE ON THERAPY AS SOON
AS YOU KNOW THEY'RE INFECTED,
DOESN'T MATTER WHAT THEIR
RESPONSE IS, BECAUSE IT'S HIGHLY
BENEFICIAL.
WE KIND OF THOUGHT THAT BUT
DIDN'T KNOW FOR SURE.
NOW WE KNOW IT'S FOR CERTAIN IF
YOU START EARLIER RATHER THAN
WAITING FOR THE IMMUNE SYSTEM TO
LESSON IN FUNCTION AND GET A
LITTLE DAMAGED, THAT'S NOT A
GOOD THING.
THE PEOPLE DO MUCH BETTER WHEN
YOU START THEM OFF EARLY.
>> IN LAYMAN'S TERMS AND VERY
QUICKLY, WHAT IS IT THE TRIALS
SHOWED THAT WASN'T CLEAR?
>> IT WAS CALLED A RANDOMIZED
TRIAL.
IT SHOWED WHEN YOU TOOK PEOPLE
INFECTED WITH HIGH CD4 COUNTS
WHICH IS THE LEVEL OF THE
LYMPHOCYTE THAT INDEPENDENCE
CATTLE THE LEVEL OF YOUR
FUNCTIONAL, IF YOU START THEM
RIGHT AWAY VERSUS WAITING TILL
THE TIME THEY GET TO A CURRENTLY
RECOMMENDED LEVEL TO START
THERAPY, WHO DOES BETTER?
THE ONES WHO WAIT OR THE ONES
WHO GET STARTED RIGHT AWAY IS
THIS AND WITHOUT A DOUBT, THE
STUDIES SHOWED DEFINITIVELY THAT
STARTING RIGHT AWAY IS A GREAT
BENEFIT TO THE PERSON.
>> WE MENTIONED IN ALLUDING TO
THIS DISCUSSION THAT'S BEEN
GOING ON FOR SOME TIME ABOUT
ACCESS, NOT ONLY WHO CAN
TOLERATE, BUT CERTAINLY THE
EXPENSE, THE AVAILABILITY, HOW
MUCH URGENCY DOES THIS ADD TO
THAT?
>> WELL, THIS ADDS A DEGREE OF
SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE, SCIENTIFIC
BASIS, EVIDENCE BASIS TO MAKE A
DIFFICULT DECISION BECAUSE IT'S
GOING TO COST RESOURCES, THEY'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO BE MUCH MORE
AGGRESSIVE IN SEEKING OUT
PEOPLE, VOLUNTARILY TESTING
THEM, GETTING THEM LINKED TO
CAIRND GETTING THEM ON THERAPY.
THAT'S NOT EASY.
BUT THE YOU'RE GOING TO MAKE A
POLICY DECISION TO DO THAT, YOU
WANT TO DO IT BASED ON SOLID,
SCIENTIFIC DATA, AND THAT'S THE
REASON WHY THE COMMUNITY IS
VIEWING THIS TRIAL AS BEING SO
IMPORTANT BECAUSE IT GIVES A
FIRM, SCIENTIFIC REASON TO MAKE
AN IMPORTANT POLICY DECISION.
>> Woodruff: SO WHO IS GOING
TO BEAR THE RESPONSIBILITY NOW
FOR COMING UP WITH THE FUNDS,
COMING UP WITH THE RESOURCES TO
MAKE THIS HAPPEN?
>> IT'S GOING TO BE A GLOBAL
THING.
FOR EXAMPLE, I MEAN, THIS IS A
GLOBAL PANDEMIC.
THERE ARE NOW 36 MILLION PEOPLE
LIVING WITH H.I.V., THE MAJORITY
IN DEVELOPING WORLDS, SUB
SAHARAN AFRICA.
SO THERE WILL BE COUNTRY
INVOLVEDS, THE W.H.O. WITH THEIR
RECOMMENDATION.
IF THE W.H.O. COMES OUT NOW AND
MAKES A RECOMMENDATION TO START
EVERYONE AS SOON AS YOU FIND OUT
THEY'RE H.I.V. INFECTED, THAT
WOULD BE AN INCENTIVE FOR
INDIVIDUAL COUNTRIES TO MODIFY
THEIR POLICIES, THEIR HEALTH
POLICIES IN THEIR OWN COUNTRIES
BECAUSE, IN CERTAIN PLACES, THEY
WON'T PAY FOR THE ANTI-REROUGH -
ANTI-RETROVIRAL IF IT'S GIVEN AT
A CERTAIN LEVEL.
SO IT'S A GREAT ADVANTAGE FOR
PEOPLE TO START EARLY, THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT INCENTIVE FOR A
VARIETY OF GROUPS, COUNTRIES,
ORGANIZATIONS, ET CETERA.
>> Woodruff: HOW MUCH PRESSURE
DOES IT PUT ON THE U.S. AND THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT?
OR DOES SPHIT.
>> WELL, I THINK IT DOES.
I WOULDN'T SAY IN THE SENSE IT
PUTS PRESSURE, BUT NEW DECISION
MAKING WHEN PEOPLE SIT DOWN AND
SAY WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO
VIS-A-VIS THE RECOMMENDATION,
YOU WANT SOLID SCIENTIFIC BASIS.
SO IF GOOD SCIENCE AND EVIDENCE
IS PRESSURE THEN IT'S PRESSURE.
>> Woodruff: AT THIS POINT,
WHAT DO YOU DO?
IN YOUR POSITION AT N.R.A.H.,
WHAT HAPPENS NOW TO GET THE WORD
OUT?
WE'RE DOING A NEWS INTERVIEW,
BUT WHAT ELSE DO YOU HAVE TO DO?
>> WHAT HAPPENS IS THIS IS
ALREADY WIDELY KNOWN BECAUSE THE
NETWORKS IN THE COMPANY OF
PEOPLE WHO TAKE CARE OF PATIENTS
ARE VERY, VERY EXCITED ABOUT
THIS FINDING.
IT WILL BE PUBLISHED IN A
HIGH-RANKING JOURNAL.
YOU HAVE TO BE SURE THAT IT'S IN
ONE OF THE BEST MEDICAL JOURNALS
AND BE DISSEMINATED, THAT
INFORMATION.
>> Woodruff: AND THE HOPE IS
PEOPLE WHO HAVE H.I.V., 60% ARE
NOT ON THE DRUG.
>> RIGHT.
WE'RE HOPING THIS WILL BE A
SOLID, SCIENTIFIC FOUNDATION AND
BASIS TO PUSH TO GET PEOPLE ON
THERAPY MUCH EARLIER, NOT ONLY
TO SAVE THEIR OWN LIVES, BUT
WHEN YOU PUT SOMEONE ON THERAPY,
YOU LOWER THE LEVEL OF VIRUS
SUCH THAT IT MAKES IT VERY
DIFFICULT FOR THEM TO INFECT
OTHERS.
SO YOU GET A TWO FER FOR IT, YU
HELP SOMEBODY'S HEALTH AND HELP
THEM FROM INFECTING OTHERS.
GOOD TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Ifill: THE CORRUPTION SCANDAL
SURROUNDING SOCCER AND ITS
GOVERNING BODY, FIFA, TRIGGERED
A SECOND DAY OF FALLOUT.
FIFA'S PRESIDENT, LONG UNDER
SCRUTINY HIMSELF, RESISTED CALLS
FOR HIS RESIGNATION.
BUT THERE WERE SIGNS THAT
SUPPORT FOR HIS LEADERSHIP IS
ERODING, AND THE GAME ITSELF HAS
BEEN THROWN UNDER A CLOUD.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS THE STORY.
>> Sreenivasan: A MUSICAL
FANFARE HERALDED THE ARRIVAL OF
FIFA PRESIDENT SEPP BLATTER
ONSTAGE TODAY, AT THE WORLD
SOCCER ORGANIZATION'S ANNUAL
CONGRESS IN ZURICH, SWITZERLAND
BUT WITH FIFA REELING AMID A
MASSIVE CORRUPTION SCANDAL,
BLATTER STRUCK A GRIM TONE.
>> THESE ARE UNPRECEDENTED AND
DIFFICULT TIMES FOR FIFA.
ACTIONS OF INDIVIDUALS, IF
PROVEN, BRING SHAME AND
HUMILIATION ON FOOTBALL AND
DEMAND ACTION AND CHANGE FROM US
ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S. HAS
INDICTED NINE TOP FIFA OFFICIALS
ON CORRUPTION CHARGES.
SWISS POLICE ARRESTED SEVEN OF
THEM AT HOTEL IN ZURICH
YESTERDAY.
THE CASE INVOLVES MORE THAN
$150 MILLION IN BRIBES OVER
DECADES FOR MARKETING AND OTHER
RIGHTS TO SOCCER TOURNAMENTS.
TODAY, WITH HIS LEADERSHIP UNDER
SEVERE SCRUTINY, BLATTER
DEFLECTED BLAME.
>> I KNOW MANY PEOPLE HOLD ME
ULTIMATELY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
ACTIONS AND REPUTATION OF THE
GLOBAL FOOTBALL COMMUNITY,
WE, OR I, CANNOT MONITOR
EVERYONE ALL OF THE TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: BLATTER DID SAY
IT'S HIS JOB TO "FIND A WAY
FORWARD."
TOMORROW, HE WILL STAND FOR
ELECTION TO A FIFTH TERM AS FIFA
PRESIDENT, BUT MANY HAVE CALLED
FOR A DELAY IN THAT POLL.
BLATTER'S ONLY CHALLENGER:
JORDANIAN PRINCE ALI BIN AL
HUSSEIN.
THE HEAD OF UEFA, EUROPE'S MAIN
SOCCER BODY, SAID MOST OF HIS
COUNTRIES PLAN TO VOTE AGAINST
BLATTER.
BLATTER. >> (translated
): PEOPLE ARE
>> (translated):
PEOPLE ARE TIRED.
TIRED.
PEOPLE NO LONGER WANT A
PRESIDENT, WHO I LIKE
I HAVE ALWAYS SAID THAT IT'S
IMPORTANT FOR FIFA TO BE STRONG
AND TODAY FIFA IS NOT STRONG.
>> Sreenivasan: THOSE COMMENTS
JOINED A DRUMBEAT OF OTHER CALLS
FOR NEW BLOOD AT THE TOP OF THE
ASSOCIATION.
>> THESE REVELATIONS HAVE
DRAGGED THE GAME'S REPUTATION
INTO THE MUD.
THE TIME HAS CLEARLY COME FOR
CHANGE AND WE WL OFILFER
>> Sreenivasan: SWITZERLAND HAS
OPENED ITS OWN PROBE INTO
POSSIBLE CRIMINAL MISMANAGEMENT
IN THE AWARDING OF THE 2022
WORLD CUP TO QATAR, AND THE 2018
WORLD CUP TO RUSSIA.
TODAY, RUSSIA SAID THERE'S NO
RISK IT WILL LOSE THE
TOURNAMENT, AND BLATTER FOUND A
FULL-THROATED DEFENDER IN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN.
HE SAID THE ARRESTS WERE MERELY
AMERICAN MEDDLING IN OTHERS'
BUSINESS.
BUSINESS. >> (translated
): WE CAN ASSUME
>> (translated): WE CAN
ASSUME THAT SOME OF THEM MAY
HAVE
THAT SOME OF THEM MAY HAVE
VIOLATED SOMETHING, I DON'T
KNOW.
BUT IT IS CLEAR THAT THE U.S.
HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH THAT
ANYWAY.
THOSE OFFICIALS ARE NOT U.S.
CITIZENS, AND IF SOME EVENT
INDEED HAPPENED, IT HAPPENED NOT
IN UNITED STATES TERRITORY.
THIS IS YET ANOTHER BLATANT
ATTEMPT TO EXTEND ITS
JURISDICTION TO OTHER STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: MEANTIME, VISA
BECAME THE FIRST MAJOR, WORLD-
CUP SPONSOR TO THREATEN TO LEAVE
ITS DEAL WITH FIFA, IF THE
ORGANIZATION DOESN'T TAKE SWIFT
AND IMMEDIATE STEPS TO ADDRESS
THE ISSUES.
>> Woodruff: NOW TO A STORY
ABOUT A HIGH-PROFILE, AND
UNUSUAL, C.E.O., WHO'S OWN
PHILOSOPHY AND UNIQUE LIFE
EXPERIENCE HAS INFLUENCED THE
WAY THINGS OPERATE DAY TO DAY
INSIDE THE COMPANY.
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT PAUL
SOLMAN HAS THE STORY, PART OF
OUR ONGOING REPORTING "MAKING
SENSE," WHICH AIRS EVERY
THURSDAY ON THE NEWSHOUR.
>> Reporter: AETNA INSURANCE,
#57 ON THE FORTUNE 500, STUNNED
CORPORATE AMERICA RECENTLY WHEN
IT HIKED ITS MINIMUM WAGE TO
$16/HOUR.
IT WAS A QUIRKY MOVE BY A QUIRKY
C.E.O.: MARK BERTOLINI,
MOTORCYCLE ENTHUSIAST, ONE-TIME
HIPPIE, TWO-TIME COLLEGE
DROPOUT, WHO ACED THE G.M.A.T.
EXAM ON A LARK, WHICH LED TO A
CORNELL M.B.A., AND A CAREER IN
HEALTH INSURANCE.
THIS C.E.O. MANAGES BY WALKING
AROUND, SLOWLY AND MINDFULLY,
ACTUALLY PRACTICING WALKING
MEDITATION, AND ATTENTIVELY
LISTENING TO HIS EMPLOYEES.
>> THIS INCOME INEQUALITY ISSUE
WAS RATTLING AROUND IN MY HEAD.
I MEAN, I CAME FROM A FAMILY
THAT WAS NOT, YOU KNOW, WE,
SOMETIMES DIDN'T HAVE INSURANCE.
MY DAD WORKED HALF TIME, MY YOU
KNOW, MY MOTHER WAS A PART-TIME
NURSE.
AND SO, I HAD BEEN PUSHING THE
TEAM ON IT, BUT I WAS GETTING
THIS SORT OF YOU KNOW, WE'RE
RUNNING A COMPANY, YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: YEAH.
>> THIS IS A, WE'RE YOU KNOW, A
CAPITALIST ENTERPRISE.
WE'RE A COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE.
>> Reporter: DID THEY KNOW THAT
YOU WERE A HIPPIE IN THE...
>> OH YEAH.
>> Reporter: ...'70s?
>> WELL, KINDA.
WE'RE NOT THE FIRST COMPANY TO
REALLY MAKE THIS KIND OF
INVESTMENT.
I MEAN, PATAGONIA.
THERE'S A BOOK OUT ABOUT IT,
RIGHT?
"LET MY PEOPLE GO SURFING,"
AND...
>> Reporter: YEAH.
HIPPIE COMPANY, YES?
>> WELL, IT'S NOT BEING A
HIPPIE.
IT'S BEING A GOOD PERSON.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, WHAT HAVE WE
FORGOTTEN ABOUT THE '70S THAT WE
ALL OF A SUDDEN AS BUSINESS
PEOPLE COME INTO THE COMMUNITY
AND SAY, "WELL, THAT WAS REALLY
COOL BACK THEN, BUT NOW I'M AN
ADULT?"
>> I ACTUALLY SHOWED PELEOP
ONCE, AND WHEN I, WHEN WE WERE
TALKING ABOUT CHANGE, I SAID TO
THEM, "IF YOU THINK CHANGE IS
BAD, LOOK AT YOUR HIGH SCHOOL
PICTURE."
AND I PUT MINE UP ON THE STAGE.
AND EVERYONE WENT, "OH MY GOD!"
(LAUGHTER)
THEY, THEY GOT A GLIMPSE.
I MEAN, I DIDN'T TALK ABOUT ALL
OF IT, I MEAN, YOU KNOW, THERE
ARE THINGS THAT YOU DON'T TALK
ABOUT IN POLITE COMPANY.
>> Reporter: SO, AREN'T THEY A
LITTLE SKEPTICAL OF YOU?
>> I DON'T THINK PEOPLE ARE
SKEPTICAL.
I THINK PEOPLE APPRECIATE THE
AUTHENTICITY, ACTUALLY.
I THINK PEOPLE ARE LOOKING FOR
AUTHENTIC LEADERS THESE DAYS.
AND BEING YOURSELF, I MEAN, YOU
KNOW, I PUT THIS TIE ON FOR YOU
TODAY, BY THE WAY.
SO...
>> Reporter: I APPRECIATE IT.
>> I DON'T WEAR, I DON'T WEAR
TIES TO WORK.
(LAUGHTER)
AND I DON'T SHAVE.
>> Reporter: AS HIS TWITTER FEED
SUGGESTS, BERTOLINI, AS C.E.O.
OF A MAJOR HEALTH CARE COMPANY,
ISN'T EXACTLY BELOVED BY ALL OF
HIS EMPLOYEES.
BUT HE ANSWERS THEM.
AS HE ANSWERS UNHAPPY CUSTOMERS.
>> I'M NOT THE MOST LOVED PERSON
ON THE PLANET.
PEOPLE ASSUME THEY UNDERSTAND
WHO I AM BY WHAT I DO.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, A NEAR-
DEATH EXPERIENCE IN 2004 LED
BERTOLINI TO MAKE BIG CHANGES IN
HIS PERSONAL LIFE AND AT THE
COMPANY.
>> I BROKE MY NECK SKIING.
I DETACHED THE NERVE ROOT FOR MY
ARM, THAT CONNECTED IT TO MY
SPINAL CORD.
AND SO IT'S SORT OF LIKE THE
TROUBLED SIBLING OF THE BODY, IT
DOESN'T OPERATE AS WELL AS IT
SHOULD.
>> Reporter: AND ALMOST DIED,
RIGHT?
>> THEY GAVE ME LAST RITES IN
THE HELICOPTER ON THE WAY TO
THE, THE HOSPITAL.
WHEN I HAD THAT ACCIDENT, I
COULDN'T ENGAGE IN MY PHYSICAL
ACTIVITY THE WAY I HAD BEFORE,
AND I STARTED ENGAGING IN YOGA
AS A PHYSICAL PRACTICE, BUT VERY
QUICKLY FOUND OUT THERE WAS
SOMETHING BROADER TO IT.
AND, AND THAT IT WAS ACTUALLY
HELPFUL FOR MY PAIN.
AND, STARTED TO GET INTO
MEDITATION, STARTED TO STUDY THE
UPANISHADS AND THE BHAGAVAD GITA
AND A LOT OF THE SCRIPTURES
ASSOCIATED WITH YOGA, THE YOGA
SUTRAS.
AND VERY QUICKLY CAME TO THIS
CONCLUSION THAT THIS HAD A HUGE
IMPACT ON MY ABILITY TO LEAD,
BUT MORE IMPORTANTLY, THE
ABILITY TO CONTROL MY
SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM,
WHICH HAD A DIRECT TIE TO THE
PAIN IN MY ARM.
>> Reporter: SO, YOUR ARM WOULD
BE HURTING ALL THE TIME?
>> MY ARM HURTS ALL THE TIME
NOW.
IT HURTS RIGHT NOW.
IT NEVER STOPS HURTING.
BUT IT'S THE LEVEL OF PAIN THAT
IS ASSOCIATED WITH IT IS
DEPENDENT ON HOW I MANAGE MY
SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM.
SO, I CAME TO WORK ONE DAY, AND
I SAID, "YOU KNOW WHAT?
I THINK WE SHOULD DO MEDITATION
AND YOGA AT WORK."
AND EVERYONE WENT, "UHHH!"
YOU KNOW?
THE EYE ROLL, RIGHT?
AND IT'S BECAUSE THE C.E.O. DOES
YOGA AND MEDITATION, WE'VE ALL
GOT TO DO YOGA AND MEDITATION.
>> NOW BRING YOUR FOCUS TO THE
CENTER OF YOUR CHEST.
AS YOU INHALE IMAGINING THE
BREATH COMING FROM THE CENTER OF
YOUR CHEST AND EXPANDS OUTWARDS.
>> Reporter: SO BERTOLINI
ORDERED A STUDY TO SEE IF
MEDITATION AND YOGA WOULD DAMPEN
THE STRESS LEVELS OF 239
EMPLOYEE VOLUNTEERS.
>> AND WE SAW DRAMATIC DROPS.
50% PERCENT DROPS IN CORTISOL
LEVELS AND HEART RATE
VARIABILITY.
WE SAW A $3,000 REDUCTION IN
THEIR HEALTHCARE COST THROUGH
THE NEXT YEAR.
WE SAW 69 MORE MINUTES OF
PRODUCTIVITY A MONTH.
>> Reporter: AND EMPLOYEE
TESTIMONIALS WERE REVEALING.
>> MY MARRIAGE HAS BEEN SAVED,
MY CHILDREN WERE WILD, I'VE
ENGAGED THEM IN THIS PRACTICE,
MY HOUSEHOLD IS MUCH MORE QUIET.
WE HAD A PERSON WHO WAS GOING TO
KILL THEMSELF, AND YOU KNOW,
I'VE DECIDED NOT TO DO IT.
PEOPLE LOST WEIGHT.
I MEAN, IT WAS JUST LIKE, OH MY
GOSH!
IF, YOU KNOW, IF A PROGRAM THAT
COSTS $190,000 TO DO, COULD SAVE
JUST ONE LIFE, WOULDN'T THAT BE
WORTH IT?
>> Reporter: BY NOW, MORE THAN
13,000 EMPLOYEES OUT OF A TOTAL
OF 49,000 HAVE TAKEN PART.
THE MOST RECENT FREE 10-WEEK
YOGA SESSION AT AETNA'S HARTFORD
HEADQUARTERS WAS OVERSUBSCRIBED
WITHIN HOURS.
>> THE INTENTION IS JUST TO FEEL
OR SENSE THE BODY, TO NOTICE
SENSATIONS.
>> Reporter: WHILE ONLINE
MINDFULNESS CLASSES HAVE ALSO
PROVEN POPULAR.
>> JUST PRACTICING LETTING BE.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE WEIGHT
LOSS PROGRAMS.
>> I'VE GOT THESE 10 EXTRA
POUNDS THAT I JUST CAN'T GET RID
OF.
>> Reporter: AND HEALTH
SCREENINGS.
ALL HOLD THE PROMISE OF PAYING
OFF, FOR WORKERS AND COMPANY
ALIKE.
>> THE FIRST YEAR AFTER WE DID
THE PROGRAM, OUR HEALTHCARE
COSTS ACTUALLY DROPPED SEVEN AND
A HALF PERCENT AS A COMPANY.
AND I HAVE TO THINK A PART OF
OUR SUCCESS SINCE THEN, AS A
COMPANY, AND NOW WHAT WE'VE DONE
AS AN ORGANIZATION AND THAT
WE'RE GROWING, WE'VE BEEN
GROWING NOW FOR THREE
CONSECUTIVE YEARS, IS PART OF
THAT.
>> Reporter: LET'S SEE HOW THE
COMPANY DOES NOW THAT HE'S
TAKING IT IN A NON-TRADITIONAL
DIRECTION.
THIS IS ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN, REPORTING FROM
BOSTON, AS MINDFULLY AS I CAN
MANAGE, FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: NOW, THE LATEST
ADDITION TO THE NEWSHOUR
BOOKSHELF.
ONE TERRIBLE DAY IN OSLO, TWO
SEPARATE INCIDENTS LEFT 77
PEOPLE DEAD AND SHOOK THE
COUNTRY TO ITS CORE.
THAT JULY DAY IN 2011 IS THE
FOCUS OF JOURNALIST
ASNE SEIERSTAD'S NEWEST BOOK,
"ONE OF US: THE STORY OF
ANDERS BREVIK AND THE MASSACRE
IN NORWAY."
JEFFREY BROWN TALKED TO HER
RECENTLY AT BUSBOYS AND POETS, A
BOOKSTORE AND RESTAURANT IN THE
D.C. AREA.
>> Brown: ASNE SEIERSTAD,
WELCOME TO YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: I WANT TO START WITH
A BIG QUESTION BECAUSE YOU'VE
WRITTEN ABOUT ONE TROUBLED
INDIVIDUAL.
YOU'VE ALSO LOOKED AT A LARGER
SOCIETY AND ITS CHANGES.
WAS IT NECESSARY TO DO BOTH TO
SEE WHAT HAPPENED THAT DAY?
>> OH, DEFINITELY.
AS THE TITLE INDICATES, ONE OF
US.
MAYBE THE BOOK IS ALSO ABOUT
WHAT MADE HIM A TERRORIST.
OF COURSE, PERSONAL AND
PSYCHOLOGICAL REASONS, BUT COULD
ALSO BE POLITICAL REASONS FOR
BECOMING A TERRORIST.
SO IT'S THREE STORIES IN THE
BOOK, WHAT MADE ANDERS BRIEVIK
GO TO THE ISLAND AND DO WHAT HE
DID.
AND THEN THE BROADER PICTURE IN
NORWAY.
>> Brown: SO YOU DOCUMENT HIS
TROUBLED CHILDHOOD, SOCIALLY
AWKWARD, OBSESSION WITH VIDEO
GAMES, TURNING TO RIGHT WING
BLOGS.
WERE YOU ABLE TO GET INSIDE HIS
HEAD?
>> LUCKILY, I WASN'T ABLE TO.
THAT'S NOT POSSIBLE.
HE HAD A VERY WELL-DOCUMENTED
LIFE.
EARLY DOCUMENTS FROM THE
1980s.
HE WROTE A DIARY.
I FOLLOWED TEN WEEKS OF THE
COURT AND I GOT ACCESS TO
INTERROGATION OF HIM, HIS FAMILY
AND FRIENDS, SO ON.
AND HE ALSO WROTE PEOPLE
LETTERS.
SO HE WROTE THIS MATERIAL.
IT'S THE LIFE OF REJECTION.
HE WAS ALSO REJECTED BY THE VERY
FAR RIGHT.
SO I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO TRY
TO FIGURE OUT WHAT MADE IT ABLE
TO BE DOCUMENTED, IT'S THROUGH
HIS OWN LIFE.
>> Brown: AND THE QUESTION IN
HIS TRIAL WHETHER HE WAS SEEN OR
NOT.
HE FOCUSED ANGER ON NORWAY'S
PERMISSIVE SOCIETY.
HE DIDN'T WANT TO BE SEEN AS
INSANE.
HE WANTED THE WORLD TO SEE HIM
AS KNOWING EXACTLY WHAT HE'S
DOING.
>> THAT WAS VERY IMPORTANT FOR
HIM.
HE TRIED TO PUBLISH A BOOK BUT
NOBODY WAS INTERESTED.
IT'S A MISHMASH TO READ.
BUT HE CALCULATED HOW MANY
PEOPLE DO I HAVE TO KILL IN
ORDER TO BE READ.
HE ENDED UP KILLING 77.
SO, OF COURSE, IF HE WAS THOUGHT
A MAD MAN, HE WOULDN'T GET ANY
FOLLOWERS.
BUT IT SEEMS HE DOES HAVE THE
ABILITY TO INSPIRE.
>> Brown: SO WHEN YOU USE THIS
TERM "ONE OF US," HOW MUCH DID
IT SHAKE THE PSYCHE OF THE
COUNTRY?
WHAT WERE THE AFTEREFFECTS?
>> WELL, IT DID SHAKE US A LOT
BECAUSE WE HAVE THIS FEELING OF
NOTHING WILL EVER HAPPEN TO US
BECAUSE IT'S ALWAYS HAPPENING TO
EVERYONE ELSE.
THE FIRST QUESTION IS HE'S MAD
OR HE'S SICK.
>> Brown: HE'S NOT ONE OF US
IN THAT SENSE.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Brown: BUT, ON THE OTHER
HAND --
>> THEN WE REALIZED THAT DOESN'T
GET US ANYWHERE TO MAKE HIM JUST
ANOTHER ONE OR THE OTHER.
>> Brown: WHAT ABOUT FOR YOU
PERSONALLY?
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME YOU'VE
LOOKED AT YOUR OWN COUNTRY AND
WRITTEN ABOUT IT.
WHAT DID YOU SEE?
>> IT'S VERY DIFFICULT.
I'VE AULD BEEN ON THE OUTSIDE,
LOOKING IN.
SUDDENLY I WAS GOING INTO THIS
ONGOING STORY ABOUT OURSELVES.
I WAS TRYING TO GET TO THE
STORY, PEOPLE WHO NEVER HEARD
ABOUT NORWAY SO I WAS TRYING TO
LOOK AT MY COUNTRY WITH FRESH
EYES.
I SHOULD NOT CARE IF HE WAS ONE
OF MY NEIGHBORS.
IT'S A SMALL COUNTRY AND IT'S
IMPORTANT TO TRY TO COME TO
TERMS WITH.
>> Brown: THE BOOK IS "ONE OF
US."
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
ASNE SEIERSTAD.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, HUMANS' MOST FAMOUS PRE-
HISTORIC ANCESTOR MAY HAVE HAD
A CROSSTOWN RIVAL, THAT'S
ACCORDING TO A NEW BATCH OF
FOSSILS FOUND IN ETHIOPIA.
ARCHAEOLOGISTS BELIEVE THAT
THESE PRIMATES ROAMED AFRICA
ABOUT THREE-AND-A-HALF MILLION
YEARS AGO, THE SAME TIME AS THE
FOSSIL KNOWN AS "LUCY."
SEE A VIDEO FROM THE EXCAVATION
SITE, ON OUR HOME PAGE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.